docs/Monitoring_Guide.md, before:

# Training Monitoring Guide

**Understanding the metrics displayed during training to diagnose issues and track progress**

---

## Table of Contents
- [Episode Statistics](#episode-statistics)
- [PPO Diagnostics](#ppo-diagnostics)
- [Loss Metrics](#loss-metrics)
- [Action Distribution](#action-distribution)
- [Environment Metrics](#environment-metrics)
- [Quick Diagnostic Table](#quick-diagnostic-table)

---

## Episode Statistics

These metrics show the outcome of each episode simulation.

### **Final: Prey=X, Predators=Y**

**Current population at episode end**

- **Healthy range**: Prey 20-150, Predators 5-35
- **Problem signs**:
  - Prey = 0: Predators too effective or prey not learning to flee
  - Prey > 180: Predators not hunting effectively
  - Predators = 0: Starvation threshold too low or predators too passive

### **Births, Deaths, Meals**

**Population dynamics events during episode**

| Metric | What it means | Healthy range |
|--------|---------------|---------------|
| Births | Successful mating events | 10-50 per episode |
| Deaths | Total deaths (all causes) | 10-60 per episode |
| Meals | Successful predator hunts | 5-30 per episode |

**Interpretation**:
- High births, low meals = Prey thriving, predators struggling
- High meals, low births = Predators dominant, prey declining
- Balanced = Ecosystem equilibrium achieved

### **Exhaustion, Old Age, Starvation**

**Breakdown of death causes**

| Death Type | Cause | If too high |
|------------|-------|-------------|
| Exhaustion | Energy dropped to 0 from movement | Reduce `ENERGY_DECAY_RATE` |
| Old Age | Reached `MAX_AGE` steps | Normal, indicates survival |
| Starvation | Predator didn't eat for `STARVATION_THRESHOLD` steps | Predators can't hunt |

**Ideal balance**: Mix of all three indicates a functioning ecosystem. Starvation-only deaths suggest hunting issues.

---

## PPO Diagnostics

These metrics indicate training stability and policy optimization health.

### **KL Divergence (KL: 0.00X)**

**How much the policy changed this update**

KL divergence measures the "distance" between the old policy and new policy.

| KL Value | Meaning | Action |
|----------|---------|--------|
| < 0.005 | Very small updates | Normal, conservative learning |
| 0.005-0.02 | Healthy learning | ✅ Ideal range |
| 0.02-0.05 | Moderate changes | Monitor for stability |
| > 0.05 | Large policy shift | ⚠️ May cause instability |

**Why it matters**:
- PPO uses KL to prevent catastrophic policy changes
- High KL means the network is changing too fast
- Training automatically stops epochs early if KL exceeds 0.03

**If KL is consistently high**:
- Reduce `LEARNING_RATE` by 50%
- Increase `PPO_CLIP_EPSILON` to 0.2
- Reduce `PPO_EPOCHS` to 4

### **Clip Fraction (ClipFrac: 0.XXX)**

**Proportion of experiences where PPO clipping was applied**

Clip fraction shows how often the policy tried to change more than `PPO_CLIP_EPSILON` allows.

| ClipFrac | Meaning | Action |
|----------|---------|--------|
| 0.00-0.10 | Minimal clipping | Policy changes are small |
| 0.10-0.25 | Moderate clipping | ✅ Normal, healthy learning |
| 0.25-0.40 | High clipping | Learning is aggressive |
| > 0.40 | Excessive clipping | ⚠️ May need tuning |

**Interpretation**:
- 0% = Policy barely changing (might be stuck)
- 20-25% = Good balance of learning and stability
- 50%+ = Policy trying to change too much, PPO is restraining it

**If ClipFrac is consistently high**:
- Reduce learning rate
- Increase `PPO_CLIP_EPSILON` (allows larger changes)

---

## Loss Metrics

### **Policy Loss (Policy: P=X.XXX/Pr=X.XXX)**

**How well actions match expected rewards**

- **P** = Prey policy loss
- **Pr** = Predator policy loss

| Value | Meaning |
|-------|---------|
| 0.001-0.05 | ✅ Healthy, stable learning |
| 0.05-0.20 | Active learning, adjusting policy |
| > 0.50 | Large policy corrections needed |
| Negative | Unusual but possible (advantage-weighted) |

**Note**: Policy loss can fluctuate significantly. Focus on trends over 10+ episodes rather than individual values.

### **Value Loss (Value: P=X.X/Pr=X.X)**

**How accurately the network predicts future rewards**

Value loss measures the error in the "critic" predicting cumulative rewards.

| Value | Meaning |
|-------|---------|
| 0.5-5.0 | ✅ Normal range |
| 5.0-15.0 | High variance in outcomes |
| > 20.0 | Prediction very inaccurate |
| Decreasing | ✅ Network learning to predict |

**If value loss is very high**:
- Rewards may have high variance
- Episode outcomes are unpredictable
- Consider reward scaling

### **Entropy (Entropy: P=X.XX/Pr=X.XX)**

**How random/exploratory the policy is**

Entropy measures the "spread" of action probabilities:
- High entropy = Many actions have similar probability (exploring)
- Low entropy = One action dominates (exploiting)

| Value | Meaning | Action |
|-------|---------|--------|
| > 2.0 | Very random | Early training, still exploring |
| 1.0-2.0 | ✅ Balanced | Good exploration/exploitation |
| 0.5-1.0 | Specializing | Policy becoming deterministic |
| < 0.5 | ⚠️ Collapsed | May be stuck, increase `ENTROPY_COEF` |

**Why entropy matters**:
- Too high = Never commits to learned behaviors
- Too low = Stuck in local optimum, won't try new strategies

---

## Action Distribution

### **Prey/Predator Actions: N:X%, NE:X%, E:X%...**

**Which directions animals are choosing**

Shows percentage breakdown of 8 movement directions (N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW).

**Healthy distribution**: Each direction roughly 10-15%, with slight variation.

**Warning signs**:
- One direction > 30% = **Bias detected** (animals stuck in pattern)
- N + S combined > 50% = Vertical movement bias
- One direction > 50% = Severe collapse, investigate rewards

**If bias detected**:
1. Check if directional loss is working
2. Verify rewards aren't accidentally favoring one direction
3. Increase `ENTROPY_COEF` to encourage exploration
4. Check for bugs in observation encoding

---

## Environment Metrics

### **Supervision Metrics**

```
[Supervision] Target visible: X.X%, Mean target dist: X.X
```

**Target visible**: Percentage of steps where predators see prey (or prey see predators)
- Low (< 20%) = Animals rarely encounter each other, consider smaller grid or more animals
- High (> 80%) = Very dense population

**Mean target dist**: Average distance to nearest target when visible
- Lower = Closer encounters, faster learning
- Higher = More travel required to reach targets

### **GPU Memory**

```
GPU Memory: X.XXB allocated, X.XXB reserved
```

- **Allocated**: Actually used by tensors
- **Reserved**: Total held by PyTorch (includes cache)

**If running out of memory**:
- Reduce `PPO_BATCH_SIZE`
- Reduce `MAX_VISIBLE_ANIMALS`
- Clear cache periodically

---

## Quick Diagnostic Table

| Symptom | Likely Cause | Solution |
|---------|--------------|----------|
| KL > 0.05 consistently | Learning rate too high | Reduce `LEARNING_RATE` by 50% |
| ClipFrac > 0.4 | Policy changing too fast | Increase `PPO_CLIP_EPSILON` to 0.25 |
| Entropy < 0.5 | Policy collapsed | Increase `ENTROPY_COEF` to 0.06 |
| All prey dead | Predators too effective | Increase `PREY_EVASION_REWARD` |
| All predators dead | Can't hunt successfully | Reduce `STARVATION_THRESHOLD` |
| One action > 30% | Direction bias | Check directional loss, increase entropy |
| Value loss > 20 | Reward variance too high | Scale rewards, check reward logic |
| No births | Mating conditions too strict | Check energy thresholds, cooldowns |
| Meals = 0 | Predators not catching prey | Check hunting rewards, vision range |

---

## Healthy Training Example

```
[12:34:56] Episode 50/150
[12:35:30] Final: Prey=85, Predators=22
[12:35:30] Births=35, Deaths=28, Meals=18
[12:35:30] Exhaustion=3, Old Age=8, Starvation=2
[12:35:30] Rewards: Prey=1250.5, Predator=890.3
[12:35:30] Losses: Policy(P=0.015/Pr=0.022), Value(P=4.2/Pr=5.8), Entropy(P=1.45/Pr=1.82)
  [PPO Diagnostics] KL: 0.008, ClipFrac: 0.18
  [Supervision] Target visible: 45.2%, Mean target dist: 8.3
[12:35:30] Prey Actions: N:14%, E:12%, SE:13%, S:11%, W:15%
[12:35:30] Predator Actions: N:11%, NE:14%, S:13%, SW:12%, W:12%
```

**This is healthy because**:
- ✅ Population balanced (85 prey, 22 predators)
- ✅ Deaths from mixed causes (not just one)
- ✅ KL divergence in good range (0.008)
- ✅ ClipFrac moderate (0.18)
- ✅ Entropy healthy (1.45, 1.82)
- ✅ Action distribution even (no bias warnings)

---

## Unhealthy Training Example

```
[12:34:56] Episode 50/150
[12:35:30] Final: Prey=0, Predators=5
[12:35:30] Births=2, Deaths=138, Meals=95
[12:35:30] Exhaustion=0, Old Age=0, Starvation=43
[12:35:30] Rewards: Prey=-2500.0, Predator=3200.5
[12:35:30] Losses: Policy(P=0.450/Pr=0.008), Value(P=25.8/Pr=2.1), Entropy(P=0.35/Pr=1.95)
  [PPO Diagnostics] KL: 0.065, ClipFrac: 0.52
[12:35:30] Prey Actions: N:45%, NE:8%, E:5%, S:38%, W:4%
[12:35:30] WARNING: Prey bias detected - N = 45%
```

**Problems detected**:
- ❌ Prey extinct (Final: Prey=0)
- ❌ Very high meals (95) = Predators too dominant
- ❌ High KL (0.065) = Training unstable
- ❌ High ClipFrac (0.52) = Policy oscillating
- ❌ Low prey entropy (0.35) = Prey policy collapsed
- ❌ Prey bias (N = 45%) = Stuck moving north

**Fixes needed**:
1. Increase `PREY_EVASION_REWARD`
2. Reduce learning rates
3. Increase `ENTROPY_COEF`
4. Check directional loss supervision

Commit message:

Add overview section to Monitoring_Guide.md

docs/Monitoring_Guide.md, after:

# Training Monitoring Guide

**Understanding the metrics displayed during training to diagnose issues and track progress**

---

## Overview

During training, the system outputs detailed metrics every episode to help you understand what's happening. This guide explains each metric, what healthy values look like, and how to diagnose common problems.

**Key monitoring areas:**
- **Episode Statistics** - Population counts, births, deaths, meals
- **PPO Diagnostics** - KL divergence and clip fraction (training stability)
- **Loss Metrics** - Policy, value, and entropy losses
- **Action Distribution** - Movement direction choices (detect bias)
- **Environment Metrics** - Target visibility and GPU memory

Use the [Quick Diagnostic Table](#quick-diagnostic-table) at the end for fast troubleshooting.

---

## Table of Contents
- [Episode Statistics](#episode-statistics)
- [PPO Diagnostics](#ppo-diagnostics)
- [Loss Metrics](#loss-metrics)
- [Action Distribution](#action-distribution)
- [Environment Metrics](#environment-metrics)
- [Quick Diagnostic Table](#quick-diagnostic-table)

---

## Episode Statistics

These metrics show the outcome of each episode simulation.

### **Final: Prey=X, Predators=Y**

**Current population at episode end**

- **Healthy range**: Prey 20-150, Predators 5-35
- **Problem signs**:
  - Prey = 0: Predators too effective or prey not learning to flee
  - Prey > 180: Predators not hunting effectively
  - Predators = 0: Starvation threshold too low or predators too passive

### **Births, Deaths, Meals**

**Population dynamics events during episode**

| Metric | What it means | Healthy range |
|--------|---------------|---------------|
| Births | Successful mating events | 10-50 per episode |
| Deaths | Total deaths (all causes) | 10-60 per episode |
| Meals | Successful predator hunts | 5-30 per episode |

**Interpretation**:
- High births, low meals = Prey thriving, predators struggling
- High meals, low births = Predators dominant, prey declining
- Balanced = Ecosystem equilibrium achieved

### **Exhaustion, Old Age, Starvation**

**Breakdown of death causes**

| Death Type | Cause | If too high |
|------------|-------|-------------|
| Exhaustion | Energy dropped to 0 from movement | Reduce `ENERGY_DECAY_RATE` |
| Old Age | Reached `MAX_AGE` steps | Normal, indicates survival |
| Starvation | Predator didn't eat for `STARVATION_THRESHOLD` steps | Predators can't hunt |

**Ideal balance**: Mix of all three indicates a functioning ecosystem. Starvation-only deaths suggest hunting issues.

---

## PPO Diagnostics

These metrics indicate training stability and policy optimization health.

### **KL Divergence (KL: 0.00X)**

**How much the policy changed this update**

KL divergence measures the "distance" between the old policy and new policy.

| KL Value | Meaning | Action |
|----------|---------|--------|
| < 0.005 | Very small updates | Normal, conservative learning |
| 0.005-0.02 | Healthy learning | ✅ Ideal range |
| 0.02-0.05 | Moderate changes | Monitor for stability |
| > 0.05 | Large policy shift | ⚠️ May cause instability |

**Why it matters**:
- PPO uses KL to prevent catastrophic policy changes
- High KL means the network is changing too fast
- Training automatically stops epochs early if KL exceeds 0.03

**If KL is consistently high**:
- Reduce `LEARNING_RATE` by 50%
- Increase `PPO_CLIP_EPSILON` to 0.2
- Reduce `PPO_EPOCHS` to 4

### **Clip Fraction (ClipFrac: 0.XXX)**

**Proportion of experiences where PPO clipping was applied**

Clip fraction shows how often the policy tried to change more than `PPO_CLIP_EPSILON` allows.

| ClipFrac | Meaning | Action |
|----------|---------|--------|
| 0.00-0.10 | Minimal clipping | Policy changes are small |
| 0.10-0.25 | Moderate clipping | ✅ Normal, healthy learning |
| 0.25-0.40 | High clipping | Learning is aggressive |
| > 0.40 | Excessive clipping | ⚠️ May need tuning |

**Interpretation**:
- 0% = Policy barely changing (might be stuck)
- 20-25% = Good balance of learning and stability
- 50%+ = Policy trying to change too much, PPO is restraining it

**If ClipFrac is consistently high**:
- Reduce learning rate
- Increase `PPO_CLIP_EPSILON` (allows larger changes)

---

## Loss Metrics

### **Policy Loss (Policy: P=X.XXX/Pr=X.XXX)**

**How well actions match expected rewards**

- **P** = Prey policy loss
- **Pr** = Predator policy loss

| Value | Meaning |
|-------|---------|
| 0.001-0.05 | ✅ Healthy, stable learning |
| 0.05-0.20 | Active learning, adjusting policy |
| > 0.50 | Large policy corrections needed |
| Negative | Unusual but possible (advantage-weighted) |

**Note**: Policy loss can fluctuate significantly. Focus on trends over 10+ episodes rather than individual values.

### **Value Loss (Value: P=X.X/Pr=X.X)**

**How accurately the network predicts future rewards**

Value loss measures the error in the "critic" predicting cumulative rewards.

| Value | Meaning |
|-------|---------|
| 0.5-5.0 | ✅ Normal range |
| 5.0-15.0 | High variance in outcomes |
| > 20.0 | Prediction very inaccurate |
| Decreasing | ✅ Network learning to predict |

**If value loss is very high**:
- Rewards may have high variance
- Episode outcomes are unpredictable
- Consider reward scaling

### **Entropy (Entropy: P=X.XX/Pr=X.XX)**

**How random/exploratory the policy is**

Entropy measures the "spread" of action probabilities:
- High entropy = Many actions have similar probability (exploring)
- Low entropy = One action dominates (exploiting)

| Value | Meaning | Action |
|-------|---------|--------|
| > 2.0 | Very random | Early training, still exploring |
| 1.0-2.0 | ✅ Balanced | Good exploration/exploitation |
| 0.5-1.0 | Specializing | Policy becoming deterministic |
| < 0.5 | ⚠️ Collapsed | May be stuck, increase `ENTROPY_COEF` |

**Why entropy matters**:
- Too high = Never commits to learned behaviors
- Too low = Stuck in local optimum, won't try new strategies

---

## Action Distribution

### **Prey/Predator Actions: N:X%, NE:X%, E:X%...**

**Which directions animals are choosing**

Shows percentage breakdown of 8 movement directions (N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW).

**Healthy distribution**: Each direction roughly 10-15%, with slight variation.

**Warning signs**:
- One direction > 30% = **Bias detected** (animals stuck in pattern)
- N + S combined > 50% = Vertical movement bias
- One direction > 50% = Severe collapse, investigate rewards

**If bias detected**:
1. Check if directional loss is working
2. Verify rewards aren't accidentally favoring one direction
3. Increase `ENTROPY_COEF` to encourage exploration
4. Check for bugs in observation encoding

---

## Environment Metrics

### **Supervision Metrics**

```
[Supervision] Target visible: X.X%, Mean target dist: X.X
```

**Target visible**: Percentage of steps where predators see prey (or prey see predators)
- Low (< 20%) = Animals rarely encounter each other, consider smaller grid or more animals
- High (> 80%) = Very dense population

**Mean target dist**: Average distance to nearest target when visible
- Lower = Closer encounters, faster learning
- Higher = More travel required to reach targets

### **GPU Memory**

```
GPU Memory: X.XXB allocated, X.XXB reserved
```

- **Allocated**: Actually used by tensors
- **Reserved**: Total held by PyTorch (includes cache)

**If running out of memory**:
- Reduce `PPO_BATCH_SIZE`
- Reduce `MAX_VISIBLE_ANIMALS`
- Clear cache periodically

---

## Quick Diagnostic Table

| Symptom | Likely Cause | Solution |
|---------|--------------|----------|
| KL > 0.05 consistently | Learning rate too high | Reduce `LEARNING_RATE` by 50% |
| ClipFrac > 0.4 | Policy changing too fast | Increase `PPO_CLIP_EPSILON` to 0.25 |
| Entropy < 0.5 | Policy collapsed | Increase `ENTROPY_COEF` to 0.06 |
| All prey dead | Predators too effective | Increase `PREY_EVASION_REWARD` |
| All predators dead | Can't hunt successfully | Reduce `STARVATION_THRESHOLD` |
| One action > 30% | Direction bias | Check directional loss, increase entropy |
| Value loss > 20 | Reward variance too high | Scale rewards, check reward logic |
| No births | Mating conditions too strict | Check energy thresholds, cooldowns |
| Meals = 0 | Predators not catching prey | Check hunting rewards, vision range |

---

## Healthy Training Example

```
[12:34:56] Episode 50/150
[12:35:30] Final: Prey=85, Predators=22
[12:35:30] Births=35, Deaths=28, Meals=18
[12:35:30] Exhaustion=3, Old Age=8, Starvation=2
[12:35:30] Rewards: Prey=1250.5, Predator=890.3
[12:35:30] Losses: Policy(P=0.015/Pr=0.022), Value(P=4.2/Pr=5.8), Entropy(P=1.45/Pr=1.82)
  [PPO Diagnostics] KL: 0.008, ClipFrac: 0.18
  [Supervision] Target visible: 45.2%, Mean target dist: 8.3
[12:35:30] Prey Actions: N:14%, E:12%, SE:13%, S:11%, W:15%
[12:35:30] Predator Actions: N:11%, NE:14%, S:13%, SW:12%, W:12%
```

**This is healthy because**:
- ✅ Population balanced (85 prey, 22 predators)
- ✅ Deaths from mixed causes (not just one)
- ✅ KL divergence in good range (0.008)
- ✅ ClipFrac moderate (0.18)
- ✅ Entropy healthy (1.45, 1.82)
- ✅ Action distribution even (no bias warnings)

---

## Unhealthy Training Example

```
[12:34:56] Episode 50/150
[12:35:30] Final: Prey=0, Predators=5
[12:35:30] Births=2, Deaths=138, Meals=95
[12:35:30] Exhaustion=0, Old Age=0, Starvation=43
[12:35:30] Rewards: Prey=-2500.0, Predator=3200.5
[12:35:30] Losses: Policy(P=0.450/Pr=0.008), Value(P=25.8/Pr=2.1), Entropy(P=0.35/Pr=1.95)
  [PPO Diagnostics] KL: 0.065, ClipFrac: 0.52
[12:35:30] Prey Actions: N:45%, NE:8%, E:5%, S:38%, W:4%
[12:35:30] WARNING: Prey bias detected - N = 45%
```
